README.md, before:

<div align="center">

![LLVM Logo](https://llvm.org/img/LLVMWyvernSmall.png)

# EMLang

**A Modern Systems Programming Language with LLVM Backend**

[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen)](#building)
[![LLVM](https://img.shields.io/badge/LLVM-14+-blue.svg)](https://llvm.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![C++](https://img.shields.io/badge/C%2B%2B-17-blue.svg)](#prerequisites)

EMLang is a statically-typed systems programming language designed for high-performance applications with ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation using LLVM. It combines modern language features with C-like performance and memory control.

</div>

---

## 🚀 Project Overview

EMLang provides a complete compiler pipeline with:
- **Advanced Type System**: Comprehensive primitive types with Unicode support
- **Memory Safety**: C-style pointers with semantic analysis
- **LLVM Integration**: Native code generation with optimization
- **Rich Standard Library**: I/O, string manipulation, math operations, and utilities

### 📁 Project Structure

```
emlang/
├── compiler/              # Complete compiler implementation
│   ├── lexer/             # Lexical analyzer with Unicode support
│   ├── parser/            # Recursive descent parser
│   ├── ast/               # Abstract Syntax Tree with visitor pattern
│   ├── semantic/          # Semantic analyzer with type checking
│   └── codegen/           # LLVM IR code generator
├── include/               # Public header files
├── library/               # Comprehensive standard library
│   ├── include/           # Library headers
│   └── src/               # Library implementations
├── src/                   # Main compiler and analysis tools
├── tests/                 # Comprehensive test suite
└── build/                 # Build artifacts and executables
```

## ✨ Language Features

#### ✅ **Primitive Types**
```emlang
// Integer types with explicit sizing
let byte: int8 = 127;
let short: int16 = 32767;
let normal: int32 = 2147483647;
let large: int64 = 9223372036854775807;

// Unsigned variants
let ubyte: uint8 = 255;
let ushort: uint16 = 65535;
let uint: uint32 = 4294967295;
let ulong: uint64 = 18446744073709551615;

// Floating point precision
let precision: float = 3.14159;
let highPrecision: double = 2.718281828459045;

// Boolean and character types
let flag: bool = true;
let character: char = 'A';
```

#### ✅ **Unicode and String Support**
```emlang
// Unicode character literals
let emoji: char = '😀';
let greek: char = '\u{03C0}';  // π
let euro: char = '\u{20AC}';   // €

// String literals with escape sequences
let message: str = "Hello, World!\n";
let path: str = "C:\\Users\\Name\\Documents";
let unicode: str = "Café Münü with symbols: ★ ♠ ♥";
```

#### ✅ **C-Style Pointer System**
```emlang
function pointerDemo(): int32 {
    let value: int32 = 42;
    let ptr: int32* = &value;        // Address-of operator
    let deref: int32 = *ptr;         // Dereference operator
    
    // Multi-level pointers
    let ptrToPtr: int32** = &ptr;
    let final: int32 = **ptrToPtr;
    
    return final;
}
```

#### ✅ **Function Declarations**
```emlang
function fibonacci(n: int32): int32 {
    if (n <= 1) {
        return n;
    }
    return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2);
}

// External function declarations
extern function printf(format: str): int32;
```

#### ✅ **Control Flow**
```emlang
function controlFlow(): void {
    let x: int32 = 10;
    
    // Conditional statements
    if (x > 5) {
        // True branch
    } else {
        // False branch
    }
    
    // Loop constructs
    while (x > 0) {
        x = x - 1;
    }
    
    for (let i: int32 = 0; i < 10; i = i + 1) {
        // Loop body
    }
}
```

## 🏗️ Architecture & Implementation

### ✅ **Lexical Analysis**
- **Unicode-aware tokenization** with full UTF-8 support
- **Escape sequence processing** for strings and characters
- **Multi-line and single-line comments**
- **Comprehensive operator recognition**

### ✅ **Syntax Analysis** 
- **Recursive descent parser** with operator precedence
- **Complete AST node hierarchy** with visitor pattern
- **Error recovery** and synchronization
- **Lookahead disambiguation**

### ✅ **Semantic Analysis**
- **Hierarchical symbol tables** with scope management
- **Static type checking** with type inference
- **Pointer type validation** and safety analysis
- **Function signature verification**

### ✅ **Code Generation**
- **LLVM IR generation** for all language constructs
- **Type mapping** from EMLang to LLVM types
- **Memory management** with stack allocation
- **Optimization passes** integration

### 📚 **Standard Library**
The library provides essential functionality across multiple domains:

- **I/O Operations**: `emlang_print_*`, `emlang_read_*`, console control
- **String Manipulation**: `emlang_strlen`, `emlang_strcmp`, case conversion
- **Mathematical Functions**: `emlang_pow`, `emlang_sqrt`, trigonometry
- **Memory Management**: `emlang_malloc`, `emlang_free`, `emlang_memset`
- **Utility Functions**: Array operations, bit manipulation, hashing

## 🔧 Building & Installation

### Prerequisites
- **CMake** 3.10 or higher
- **C++17** compatible compiler (GCC 7+, Clang 5+, MSVC 2017+)
- **LLVM** 14+ (automatically detected, enables code generation)
- **Git** for cloning and version control

### 🏗️ Build Process

#### Windows (Visual Studio)
```powershell
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang.git
cd emlang

# Create build directory
mkdir build
cd build

# Configure with CMake
cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64

# Build the project
cmake --build . --config Release

# Run tests
./Release/emlang_check.exe ../tests/simple_types_test.em
```

#### Linux/macOS
```bash
# Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang.git
cd emlang

# Create and enter build directory
mkdir build && cd build

# Configure and build
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
make -j$(nproc)

# Install (optional)
sudo make install
```

### 📦 Build Targets

- **`emlang`** - Main compiler executable
- **`emlang_check`** - AST and token analysis tool
- **`emlang_compiler`** - Compiler library (DLL/shared object)
- **`emlang_lib`** - Standard library (optional, requires LLVM)

## 🚀 Usage & Examples

### Basic Compilation
```bash
# Compile EMLang source to object file
./emlang source.em

# Generate LLVM IR
./emlang --emit-llvm source.em -o output.ll

# Analyze source code structure
./emlang_check --ast --tokens source.em
```

### 📝 Language Examples

#### Complete Program
```emlang
extern function printf(format: str): int32;

function factorial(n: int32): int32 {
    if (n <= 1) {
        return 1;
    }
    return n * factorial(n - 1);
}

function main(): int32 {
    let number: int32 = 5;
    let result: int32 = factorial(number);
    
    printf("Factorial of %d is %d\n");
    return 0;
}
```

#### Pointer Operations
```emlang
function swapIntegers(a: int32*, b: int32*): void {
    let temp: int32 = *a;
    *a = *b;
    *b = temp;
}

function main(): int32 {
    let x: int32 = 10;
    let y: int32 = 20;
    
    swapIntegers(&x, &y);
    // x is now 20, y is now 10
    
    return 0;
}
```

#### String and Character Processing
```emlang
function stringDemo(): void {
    let greeting: str = "Hello, 世界! 🌍";
    let firstChar: char = 'H';
    let unicode: char = '\u{1F30D}';  // 🌍
    
    // String escape sequences
    let formatted: str = "Line 1\nLine 2\t\"Quoted\"";
    let path: str = "C:\\Program Files\\EMLang";
}
```

### 🔍 Analysis Tools

#### Token Analysis
```bash
$ ./emlang_check --tokens simple_test.em
=== TOKENS ===
FUNCTION function 1:1
IDENTIFIER main 1:10
LEFT_PAREN ( 1:14
RIGHT_PAREN ) 1:15
COLON : 1:16
INT32 int32 1:18
LEFT_BRACE { 1:24
...
```

#### AST Visualization
```bash
$ ./emlang_check --ast simple_test.em
=== AST ===
Program
  FunctionDeclaration: main
    ReturnType: int32
    Parameters: []
    Body: BlockStatement
      ReturnStatement
        LiteralExpression: 0 (int32)
```

## 📊 Compiler Pipeline

The EMLang compiler implements a complete compilation pipeline:

1. **📝 Lexical Analysis** → Token stream generation
2. **🌳 Syntax Analysis** → Abstract Syntax Tree construction  
3. **🔍 Semantic Analysis** → Type checking and symbol resolution
4. **⚡ Code Generation** → LLVM IR emission
5. **🎯 Optimization** → LLVM optimization passes
6. **🔧 Linking** → Native executable generation

### 🚨 Error Reporting

EMLang provides comprehensive error diagnostics:

```
Semantic Error at 7:15 - Type mismatch: cannot assign 'str' to 'int32'
Semantic Error at 12:8 - Variable 'undeclared' not found in current scope  
Semantic Error at 18:23 - Function 'unknown' is not declared
Parse Error at 25:1 - Expected ';' after expression statement
```

## 🧪 Testing & Validation

### Test Suite Coverage
- **✅ Basic Types**: `simple_types_test.em`
- **✅ Unicode Characters**: `char_string_test.em`, `advanced_char_test.em`
- **✅ Pointer Operations**: `simple_pointer_test.em`, `multilevel_pointer_test.em`
- **✅ External Functions**: `extern_function_test.em`, `simple_extern_test.em`
- **✅ Integration**: `phase2_integration_test.em`, `phase3_pointer_test.em`
- **✅ Error Detection**: `error_test.em`

### Running Tests
```bash
# Run all tests
cd tests
for test in *.em; do
    echo "Testing $test"
    ../build/Debug/emlang_check "$test"
done

# Individual test analysis
./build/Debug/emlang_check --all tests/phase3_pointer_test.em
```

## 📈 Development Roadmap

### ✅ **Completed Phases**

#### **Phase 1**: Core Type System
- [x] Primitive integer types (int8, int16, int32, int64)
- [x] Unsigned variants (uint8, uint16, uint32, uint64)
- [x] Floating point types (float, double)
- [x] Boolean and void types
- [x] LLVM backend integration

#### **Phase 2**: Character & String System  
- [x] Unicode character support (`char` type)
- [x] String literals with escape sequences
- [x] Character literals with Unicode escapes
- [x] UTF-8 string handling
- [x] Comprehensive string operations

#### **Phase 3**: C-Style Pointer System
- [x] Pointer type declarations (`int32*`, `char**`)
- [x] Address-of operator (`&variable`)
- [x] Dereference operator (`*pointer`)
- [x] Multi-level pointer support
- [x] Pointer arithmetic and type safety
- [x] Complete semantic analysis

### 🚧 **In Progress**

#### **Phase 4**: Advanced Features
- [ ] Array types and operations
- [ ] Struct/record types
- [ ] Enum types
- [ ] Pattern matching

### 🔮 **Future Plans**

#### **Phase 5**: Advanced Language Features
- [ ] Generic types and functions
- [ ] Module system with imports
- [ ] Memory ownership model
- [ ] Async/await support

#### **Phase 6**: Development Tools
- [ ] Language Server Protocol (LSP)
- [ ] IDE integration and plugins
- [ ] Package manager
- [ ] Documentation generator

## 📚 Library Reference

### Standard Library Modules

#### 🔢 **Mathematics** (`math.h`)
```c
float emlang_pow(float base, float exp);     // Power function
float emlang_sqrt(float x);                  // Square root
float emlang_sin(float x);                   // Sine function
float emlang_cos(float x);                   // Cosine function
float emlang_tan(float x);                   // Tangent function
float emlang_abs(float x);                   // Absolute value
```

#### 📝 **String Operations** (`string.h`)
```c
int emlang_strlen(const char* str);                    // String length
int emlang_strcmp(const char* str1, const char* str2); // String comparison  
char* emlang_strcpy(char* dest, const char* src);      // String copy
char* emlang_to_upper(char* str);                      // Convert to uppercase
char* emlang_to_lower(char* str);                      // Convert to lowercase
```

#### 💾 **Memory Management** (`memory.h`)
```c
void* emlang_malloc(int size);              // Allocate memory
void emlang_free(void* ptr);                // Free allocated memory
void emlang_memset(void* ptr, int val, int size); // Set memory values
```

#### 🖥️ **Input/Output** (`io.h`)
```c
void emlang_print_int(int value);           // Print integer
void emlang_print_str(const char* str);     // Print string
void emlang_print_char(char c);             // Print character
int emlang_read_int(void);                  // Read integer from input
char emlang_read_char(void);                // Read character from input
```

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions to EMLang! Here's how you can help:

### 🐛 **Bug Reports**
- Use GitHub Issues to report bugs
- Include minimal reproduction code
- Specify your operating system and compiler version

### ✨ **Feature Requests**
- Propose new language features through GitHub Issues
- Provide use cases and examples
- Consider implementation complexity

### 💻 **Code Contributions**
1. **Fork** the repository
2. **Create** a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. **Commit** your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. **Push** to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. **Open** a Pull Request

### 📋 **Development Guidelines**
- Follow the existing code style and conventions
- Add tests for new features
- Update documentation for API changes
- Ensure all tests pass before submitting

### 🔍 **Areas Needing Help**
- **Standard Library**: Expand mathematical and utility functions
- **Error Messages**: Improve error reporting and suggestions
- **Optimization**: LLVM optimization pass integration
- **Documentation**: API documentation and tutorials
- **Testing**: Additional test cases and edge cases

## 📄 License

EMLang is released under the **MIT License**. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

```
MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 EMLang Project

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
```

---

## 🔗 Links & Resources

- **📖 Documentation**: [EMLang Language Guide](docs/)
- **🐛 Issue Tracker**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/issues)
- **💬 Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/discussions)
- **📧 Contact**: [project@emlang.dev](mailto:project@emlang.dev)

---

<div align="center">

**Built with ❤️ using LLVM**

*EMLang - Where Performance Meets Productivity*

[⭐ Star us on GitHub](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang) | [🍴 Fork the Project](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/fork) | [📝 Report Issues](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/issues)

</div>

Commit message:

README.md update EMLang warning added

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

![LLVM Logo](https://llvm.org/img/LLVMWyvernSmall.png)

# EMLang

**A Modern Systems Programming Language with LLVM Backend**

[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen)](#building)
[![LLVM](https://img.shields.io/badge/LLVM-14+-blue.svg)](https://llvm.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![C++](https://img.shields.io/badge/C%2B%2B-17-blue.svg)](#prerequisites)

EMLang is a statically-typed systems programming language designed for high-performance applications with ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation using LLVM. It combines modern language features with C-like performance and memory control.

> [!Warning]
> **This language is not designed for production use, it is created for testing and learning purposes only.**
> It is not recommended to use it in production systems.
> It is a work in progress and may not be fully functional or stable.

</div>

---

## 🚀 Project Overview

EMLang provides a complete compiler pipeline with:
- **Advanced Type System**: Comprehensive primitive types with Unicode support
- **Memory Safety**: C-style pointers with semantic analysis
- **LLVM Integration**: Native code generation with optimization
- **Rich Standard Library**: I/O, string manipulation, math operations, and utilities

### 📁 Project Structure

```
emlang/
├── compiler/              # Complete compiler implementation
│   ├── lexer/             # Lexical analyzer with Unicode support
│   ├── parser/            # Recursive descent parser
│   ├── ast/               # Abstract Syntax Tree with visitor pattern
│   ├── semantic/          # Semantic analyzer with type checking
│   └── codegen/           # LLVM IR code generator
├── include/               # Public header files
├── library/               # Comprehensive standard library
│   ├── include/           # Library headers
│   └── src/               # Library implementations
├── src/                   # Main compiler and analysis tools
├── tests/                 # Comprehensive test suite
└── build/                 # Build artifacts and executables
```

## ✨ Language Features

#### ✅ **Primitive Types**
```emlang
// Integer types with explicit sizing
let byte: int8 = 127;
let short: int16 = 32767;
let normal: int32 = 2147483647;
let large: int64 = 9223372036854775807;

// Unsigned variants
let ubyte: uint8 = 255;
let ushort: uint16 = 65535;
let uint: uint32 = 4294967295;
let ulong: uint64 = 18446744073709551615;

// Floating point precision
let precision: float = 3.14159;
let highPrecision: double = 2.718281828459045;

// Boolean and character types
let flag: bool = true;
let character: char = 'A';
```

#### ✅ **Unicode and String Support**
```emlang
// Unicode character literals
let emoji: char = '😀';
let greek: char = '\u{03C0}';  // π
let euro: char = '\u{20AC}';   // €

// String literals with escape sequences
let message: str = "Hello, World!\n";
let path: str = "C:\\Users\\Name\\Documents";
let unicode: str = "Café Münü with symbols: ★ ♠ ♥";
```

#### ✅ **C-Style Pointer System**
```emlang
function pointerDemo(): int32 {
    let value: int32 = 42;
    let ptr: int32* = &value;        // Address-of operator
    let deref: int32 = *ptr;         // Dereference operator
    
    // Multi-level pointers
    let ptrToPtr: int32** = &ptr;
    let final: int32 = **ptrToPtr;
    
    return final;
}
```

#### ✅ **Function Declarations**
```emlang
function fibonacci(n: int32): int32 {
    if (n <= 1) {
        return n;
    }
    return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2);
}

// External function declarations
extern function printf(format: str): int32;
```

#### ✅ **Control Flow**
```emlang
function controlFlow(): void {
    let x: int32 = 10;
    
    // Conditional statements
    if (x > 5) {
        // True branch
    } else {
        // False branch
    }
    
    // Loop constructs
    while (x > 0) {
        x = x - 1;
    }
    
    for (let i: int32 = 0; i < 10; i = i + 1) {
        // Loop body
    }
}
```

## 🏗️ Architecture & Implementation

### ✅ **Lexical Analysis**
- **Unicode-aware tokenization** with full UTF-8 support
- **Escape sequence processing** for strings and characters
- **Multi-line and single-line comments**
- **Comprehensive operator recognition**

### ✅ **Syntax Analysis** 
- **Recursive descent parser** with operator precedence
- **Complete AST node hierarchy** with visitor pattern
- **Error recovery** and synchronization
- **Lookahead disambiguation**

### ✅ **Semantic Analysis**
- **Hierarchical symbol tables** with scope management
- **Static type checking** with type inference
- **Pointer type validation** and safety analysis
- **Function signature verification**

### ✅ **Code Generation**
- **LLVM IR generation** for all language constructs
- **Type mapping** from EMLang to LLVM types
- **Memory management** with stack allocation
- **Optimization passes** integration

### 📚 **Standard Library**
The library provides essential functionality across multiple domains:

- **I/O Operations**: `emlang_print_*`, `emlang_read_*`, console control
- **String Manipulation**: `emlang_strlen`, `emlang_strcmp`, case conversion
- **Mathematical Functions**: `emlang_pow`, `emlang_sqrt`, trigonometry
- **Memory Management**: `emlang_malloc`, `emlang_free`, `emlang_memset`
- **Utility Functions**: Array operations, bit manipulation, hashing

## 🔧 Building & Installation

### Prerequisites
- **CMake** 3.10 or higher
- **C++17** compatible compiler (GCC 7+, Clang 5+, MSVC 2017+)
- **LLVM** 14+ (automatically detected, enables code generation)
- **Git** for cloning and version control

### 🏗️ Build Process

#### Windows (Visual Studio)
```powershell
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang.git
cd emlang

# Create build directory
mkdir build
cd build

# Configure with CMake
cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64

# Build the project
cmake --build . --config Release

# Run tests
./Release/emlang_check.exe ../tests/simple_types_test.em
```

#### Linux/macOS
```bash
# Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang.git
cd emlang

# Create and enter build directory
mkdir build && cd build

# Configure and build
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
make -j$(nproc)

# Install (optional)
sudo make install
```

### 📦 Build Targets

- **`emlang`** - Main compiler executable
- **`emlang_check`** - AST and token analysis tool
- **`emlang_compiler`** - Compiler library (DLL/shared object)
- **`emlang_lib`** - Standard library (optional, requires LLVM)

## 🚀 Usage & Examples

### Basic Compilation
```bash
# Compile EMLang source to object file
./emlang source.em

# Generate LLVM IR
./emlang --emit-llvm source.em -o output.ll

# Analyze source code structure
./emlang_check --ast --tokens source.em
```

### 📝 Language Examples

#### Complete Program
```emlang
extern function printf(format: str): int32;

function factorial(n: int32): int32 {
    if (n <= 1) {
        return 1;
    }
    return n * factorial(n - 1);
}

function main(): int32 {
    let number: int32 = 5;
    let result: int32 = factorial(number);
    
    printf("Factorial of %d is %d\n");
    return 0;
}
```

#### Pointer Operations
```emlang
function swapIntegers(a: int32*, b: int32*): void {
    let temp: int32 = *a;
    *a = *b;
    *b = temp;
}

function main(): int32 {
    let x: int32 = 10;
    let y: int32 = 20;
    
    swapIntegers(&x, &y);
    // x is now 20, y is now 10
    
    return 0;
}
```

#### String and Character Processing
```emlang
function stringDemo(): void {
    let greeting: str = "Hello, 世界! 🌍";
    let firstChar: char = 'H';
    let unicode: char = '\u{1F30D}';  // 🌍
    
    // String escape sequences
    let formatted: str = "Line 1\nLine 2\t\"Quoted\"";
    let path: str = "C:\\Program Files\\EMLang";
}
```

### 🔍 Analysis Tools

#### Token Analysis
```bash
$ ./emlang_check --tokens simple_test.em
=== TOKENS ===
FUNCTION function 1:1
IDENTIFIER main 1:10
LEFT_PAREN ( 1:14
RIGHT_PAREN ) 1:15
COLON : 1:16
INT32 int32 1:18
LEFT_BRACE { 1:24
...
```

#### AST Visualization
```bash
$ ./emlang_check --ast simple_test.em
=== AST ===
Program
  FunctionDeclaration: main
    ReturnType: int32
    Parameters: []
    Body: BlockStatement
      ReturnStatement
        LiteralExpression: 0 (int32)
```

## 📊 Compiler Pipeline

The EMLang compiler implements a complete compilation pipeline:

1. **📝 Lexical Analysis** → Token stream generation
2. **🌳 Syntax Analysis** → Abstract Syntax Tree construction  
3. **🔍 Semantic Analysis** → Type checking and symbol resolution
4. **⚡ Code Generation** → LLVM IR emission
5. **🎯 Optimization** → LLVM optimization passes
6. **🔧 Linking** → Native executable generation

### 🚨 Error Reporting

EMLang provides comprehensive error diagnostics:

```
Semantic Error at 7:15 - Type mismatch: cannot assign 'str' to 'int32'
Semantic Error at 12:8 - Variable 'undeclared' not found in current scope  
Semantic Error at 18:23 - Function 'unknown' is not declared
Parse Error at 25:1 - Expected ';' after expression statement
```

## 🧪 Testing & Validation

### Test Suite Coverage
- **✅ Basic Types**: `simple_types_test.em`
- **✅ Unicode Characters**: `char_string_test.em`, `advanced_char_test.em`
- **✅ Pointer Operations**: `simple_pointer_test.em`, `multilevel_pointer_test.em`
- **✅ External Functions**: `extern_function_test.em`, `simple_extern_test.em`
- **✅ Integration**: `phase2_integration_test.em`, `phase3_pointer_test.em`
- **✅ Error Detection**: `error_test.em`

### Running Tests
```bash
# Run all tests
cd tests
for test in *.em; do
    echo "Testing $test"
    ../build/Debug/emlang_check "$test"
done

# Individual test analysis
./build/Debug/emlang_check --all tests/phase3_pointer_test.em
```

## 📈 Development Roadmap

### ✅ **Completed Phases**

#### **Phase 1**: Core Type System
- [x] Primitive integer types (int8, int16, int32, int64)
- [x] Unsigned variants (uint8, uint16, uint32, uint64)
- [x] Floating point types (float, double)
- [x] Boolean and void types
- [x] LLVM backend integration

#### **Phase 2**: Character & String System  
- [x] Unicode character support (`char` type)
- [x] String literals with escape sequences
- [x] Character literals with Unicode escapes
- [x] UTF-8 string handling
- [x] Comprehensive string operations

#### **Phase 3**: C-Style Pointer System
- [x] Pointer type declarations (`int32*`, `char**`)
- [x] Address-of operator (`&variable`)
- [x] Dereference operator (`*pointer`)
- [x] Multi-level pointer support
- [x] Pointer arithmetic and type safety
- [x] Complete semantic analysis

### 🚧 **In Progress**

#### **Phase 4**: Advanced Features
- [ ] Array types and operations
- [ ] Struct/record types
- [ ] Enum types
- [ ] Pattern matching

### 🔮 **Future Plans**

#### **Phase 5**: Advanced Language Features
- [ ] Generic types and functions
- [ ] Module system with imports
- [ ] Memory ownership model
- [ ] Async/await support

#### **Phase 6**: Development Tools
- [ ] Language Server Protocol (LSP)
- [ ] IDE integration and plugins
- [ ] Package manager
- [ ] Documentation generator

## 📚 Library Reference

### Standard Library Modules

#### 🔢 **Mathematics** (`math.h`)
```c
float emlang_pow(float base, float exp);     // Power function
float emlang_sqrt(float x);                  // Square root
float emlang_sin(float x);                   // Sine function
float emlang_cos(float x);                   // Cosine function
float emlang_tan(float x);                   // Tangent function
float emlang_abs(float x);                   // Absolute value
```

#### 📝 **String Operations** (`string.h`)
```c
int emlang_strlen(const char* str);                    // String length
int emlang_strcmp(const char* str1, const char* str2); // String comparison  
char* emlang_strcpy(char* dest, const char* src);      // String copy
char* emlang_to_upper(char* str);                      // Convert to uppercase
char* emlang_to_lower(char* str);                      // Convert to lowercase
```

#### 💾 **Memory Management** (`memory.h`)
```c
void* emlang_malloc(int size);              // Allocate memory
void emlang_free(void* ptr);                // Free allocated memory
void emlang_memset(void* ptr, int val, int size); // Set memory values
```

#### 🖥️ **Input/Output** (`io.h`)
```c
void emlang_print_int(int value);           // Print integer
void emlang_print_str(const char* str);     // Print string
void emlang_print_char(char c);             // Print character
int emlang_read_int(void);                  // Read integer from input
char emlang_read_char(void);                // Read character from input
```

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions to EMLang! Here's how you can help:

### 🐛 **Bug Reports**
- Use GitHub Issues to report bugs
- Include minimal reproduction code
- Specify your operating system and compiler version

### ✨ **Feature Requests**
- Propose new language features through GitHub Issues
- Provide use cases and examples
- Consider implementation complexity

### 💻 **Code Contributions**
1. **Fork** the repository
2. **Create** a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. **Commit** your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. **Push** to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. **Open** a Pull Request

### 📋 **Development Guidelines**
- Follow the existing code style and conventions
- Add tests for new features
- Update documentation for API changes
- Ensure all tests pass before submitting

### 🔍 **Areas Needing Help**
- **Standard Library**: Expand mathematical and utility functions
- **Error Messages**: Improve error reporting and suggestions
- **Optimization**: LLVM optimization pass integration
- **Documentation**: API documentation and tutorials
- **Testing**: Additional test cases and edge cases

## 📄 License

EMLang is released under the **MIT License**. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

```
MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 EMLang Project

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
```

---

## 🔗 Links & Resources

- **📖 Documentation**: [EMLang Language Guide](docs/)
- **🐛 Issue Tracker**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/issues)
- **💬 Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/discussions)
- **📧 Contact**: [project@emlang.dev](mailto:project@emlang.dev)

---

<div align="center">

**Built with ❤️ using LLVM**

*EMLang - Where Performance Meets Productivity*

[⭐ Star us on GitHub](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang) | [🍴 Fork the Project](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/fork) | [📝 Report Issues](https://github.com/ByaCherX/emlang/issues)

</div>
